Title: "Scientific Rust #rust2019"
Date: 2019-01-05 17:00
Author: luizirber
Category: science
Tags: bioinformatics, rust
Slug: rust-2019

The Rust community requested feedback last year for where the language should go
in 2018, and now they are running it again for 2019.
Last year I was too new in Rust to organize a blog post,
but after an year using it I feel more comfortable writing this!

(Check my previous post about [replacing the C++ core in sourmash with Rust][refactor] for more details on how I spend my year in Rust).

[refactor]: {filename}/2018-08-23-sourmash-rust.md

## What counts as "scientific Rust"?

Anything that involves doing science using computers counts as
scientific programming. It includes from embedded software
[running on satellites][rustconf-sat] to climate models
running in supercomputers, from shell scripts running tools in a pipeline to
data analysis using notebooks.

It also makes the discussion harder, because it's too general! But it is very
important to keep in mind, because scientists are not your regular user: they
are highly qualified in their field of expertise, and they are also pushing the
boundaries of what we know (and this might need flexibility in their tools).

In this post I will be focusing more in two areas: array computing (what most
people consider 'scientific programming' to be) and "data structures".

[rustconf-sat]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y5Yd3FC-kh8

### Array computing

This one is booming in the last couple of years due to industry interest in data
sciences and deep learning (where they will talk about tensors instead of arrays),
and has its roots in models running in supercomputers (a field where Fortran is
still king!). Data tends to be quite regular (representable with matrices) and 
amenable to parallel processing.

A good example is the SciPy stack in Python, built on top of NumPy and SciPy.
The adoption of the SciPy stack (both in academia and industry) is staggering,
and many [alternative implementations][cupy] try to provide a NumPy-like API to try to
capture its mindshare.

This is the compute-intensive side science (be it CPU or GPU/TPU), and also the kind
of data that pushed CPU evolution and is still very important in defining policy
in scientific computing funding (see countries competing for the largest
supercomputers and measuring performance in floating point operations per second).

[cupy]: https://github.com/cupy/cupy

### Data structures for efficient data representation

For data that is not so regular the situation is a bit different. I'll use
bioinformatics as an example: the data we get out of nucleotide sequencers is usually
represented by long strings (of ACGT), and algorithms will do a lot of string processing
(be it building string-overlap graphs for assembly, or searching for substrings
in large collections). This is only one example: there are many analyses that
will work with other types of data, and most of them don't have a
universal data representation as in the array computing case.

This is the memory-intensive science, and it's hard to measure performance in
floating point operations because... most of the time you're not even using
floating point numbers. It also suffers from limited data locality (which is
almost a prerequisite for compute-intensive performance).

## High performance core, interactive API

There is something common in both cases: while performance-intensive
code is implemented in C/C++/Fortran, users usually interact with the API from
other languages (especially Python or R) because it's faster to iterate and
explore the data, and many of the tools already available in these languages are
very helpful for these tasks (think Jupyter/pandas or RStudio/tidyverse).
These languages are used to define the computation, but it is a lower-level core
library that drives it (NumPy or Tensorflow follow this idea, for example).

## How to make Rust better for science?

The biggest barrier to learning Rust is the ownership model, and while we can
agree it is an important feature it is also quite daunting for newcomers,
especially if they don't have previous programming experience and exposure to
what bugs are being prevented. I don't see it being the first language we teach
to scientists any time soon, because the majority of scientists are not system
programmers, and have very different expectations for a programming language.
That doesn't mean that they can't benefit from Rust!

Rust is already great for building the performance-intensive parts,
and thanks to Cargo it is also a better alternative for sharing this code around,
since they tend to get 'stuck' inside Python or R packages.
And the 'easy' approach of vendoring C/C++ instead of having packages make it
hard to keep track of changes and doesn't encourage reusable code.

And, of course, if this code is Rust instead of C/C++ it also means that Rust
users can use them directly, without depending on the other languages. Seems
like a good way to bootstrap a scientific community in Rust =]

## What I would like to see in 2019?

### An attribute proc-macro like `#[wasm_bindgen]` but for FFI

While FFI is an integral part of Rust goals (interoperability with C/C++), I
have serious envy of the structure and tooling developed for WebAssembly! (Even
more now that it works in stable too)

We already have `#[no_mangle]` and `pub extern "C"`, but they are quite
low-level. I would love to see something closer to what wasm-bindgen does,
and define some traits (like [`IntoWasmAbi`][intowasm]) to make it easier to
pass more complex data types through the FFI.

I know it's not that simple, and there are different design restrictions than
WebAssembly to take into account... The point here is not having the perfect
solution for all use cases, but something that serves as an entry point and helps
to deal with the complexity while you're still figuring out all the quirks and
traps of FFI. You can still fallback and have more control using the lower-level
options when the need rises.

[intowasm]: https://rustwasm.github.io/wasm-bindgen/api/wasm_bindgen/convert/trait.IntoWasmAbi.html

### More -sys and Rust-like crates for interoperability with the larger ecosystems

There are new projects bringing more interoperability to [dataframes][arrow] and [tensors][xnd].
While this ship has already sailed and they are implemented in C/C++,
it would be great to be a first-class citizen,
and not reinvent the wheel.
(Note: the arrow project already have pretty good Rust support!)

[arrow]: https://arrow.apache.org/
[xnd]: https://xnd.io/

In my own corner (bioinformatics), the [Rust-bio community][rust-bio] is doing a
great job of wrapping [useful libraries in C/C++][htslib] and exposing them to
Rust (and also a shout-out to 10X Genomics for doing this work for
[other tools][bwa] while also contributing to Rust-bio!).

[rust-bio]: https://github.com/rust-bio

[htslib]: https://github.com/rust-bio/rust-htslib
[bwa]: https://github.com/10XGenomics/rust-bwa

### More (bioinformatics) tools using Rust!

We already have great examples like [finch][finch] and [yacrd][yacrd],
since Rust is great for single binary distribution of programs.
And with bioinformatics focusing so much in independent tools chained together in workflows,
I think we can start convincing people to try it out =]

[finch]: https://github.com/onecodex/finch-rs
[yacrd]: https://github.com/natir/yacrd

### A place to find other scientists?

Another idea is to draw inspiration from [rOpenSci][ropensci] and have a Rust equivalent,
where people can get feedback about their projects and how to better integrate it with other crates.
This is quite close to the working group idea,
but I think it would serve more as a gateway to other groups,
more focused on developing entry-level docs and bringing more scientists to the
community.

[ropensci]: https://ropensci.org/about/

## Final words

In the end, I feel like this post ended up turning into my 'wishful TODO list'
for 2019, but I would love to find more people sharing these goals (or willing
to take any of this and just run with it, I do have a PhD to finish! =P)

## Comments?

- [Thread on Mastodon][100]
- [Thread on Twitter][101]


[100]: https://social.lasanha.org/@luizirber/
[101]: https://twitter.com/luizirber/status/
